Blogpost on OMPL constrained planning (GSoC 2020) (#500)
ros-planning/moveit.ros.org: _posts/2020-09-10-ompl-constrained-planning-gsoc.md

---
author: Jeroen De Maeyer, PhD Student, KU Leuven, Belgium
comments: false
date: 2020-09-10
layout: post
title: A new approach for planning with path constraints in MoveIt
media_type: video

> media_link: TODO(presentation PickNik)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
media_link: https://www.youtube.com/embed/qEketOee7_g
```

description: Integrating OMPL's constrained planning capabilities into MoveIt
categories:
- moveit
---

In the past three months, I added a new planning approach to the existing OMPL interface, during my [Google Summer of Code project](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/organizations/5848470994288640/#5590997586673664). It addresses known issues with the current planners to handle Cartesian path constraints, especially when the constrained region is small.

> The Open Motion Planning Library (OMPL) is the main library used by MoveIt to plan collision-free paths. Since 2018, OMPL included [capabilities](http://ompl.kavrakilab.org/constrainedPlanning.html) to plan paths with generic constraints represented by a function f(q) = 0, where q represents the robot’s state. These constraints are decoupled from the planning algorithms by introducing a “constrained state space”. Sampling in this constrained state space will give samples that satisfy the constraints and therefore a planner can operate as if there were no constraints. The implementation of these constrained state spaces in OMPL calculates such valid states by taking a random joint space sample and projecting it on the constraints region. This approach has some advantages compared to rejection sampling (the current approach available in MoveIt to handle arbitrary constraints). This projection sampling from OMPL is potentially faster and can handle constraints such as moving along a plane or a line, which have zero volume in Cartesian space. These constraints cannot be handled by rejection sampling.

Reviewer 2: "some advantages"? Is there anything more compelling, maybe a paper to link?

I would put f(q) = 0 and q into code formatting: `f(q) = 0` etc

Author: I tried to make the sentence clearer and added a link to a good publication that explains all this in more detail.

<img src="/assets/images/blog_posts/ompl_constrained_planning/pos_con_pose_model.gif" alt="drawing" width="45%"/>
<img src="/assets/images/blog_posts/ompl_constrained_planning/pos_con_new_planner.gif" alt="drawing" width="45%"/>

A [new tutorial](https://github.com/ros-planning/moveit_tutorials/pull/518) explains how to configure and use this new planning option, using simple but instructive examples with the Panda robot. These are implemented using MoveIt’s [Python interface](https://ros-planning.github.io/moveit_tutorials/doc/move_group_python_interface/move_group_python_interface_tutorial.html), making it extremely convenient to try out the new planner and quickly experiment with different planning problems.

<img src="/assets/images/blog_posts/ompl_constrained_planning/tutorial_case_2.gif" alt="drawing" width="45%"/>
<img src="/assets/images/blog_posts/ompl_constrained_planning/tutorial_case_3.gif" alt="drawing" width="45%"/>

> These example problems are only the tip of the iceberg. An [external planning plugin](https://github.com/JeroenDM/elion) showes the potential of this new planning technique and allows you to test experimental constraints. In addition, alternative approaches to projection-based sampling are available im OMPL that could be used for a subset of the constraints.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These example problems are only the tip of the iceberg. An [external planning plugin](https://github.com/JeroenDM/elion) shows the potential of this new planning technique and allows you to test experimental constraints. In addition, alternative approaches to projection-based sampling are available in OMPL that could be used for a subset of the constraints.
```

<img src="/assets/images/blog_posts/ompl_constrained_planning/welding_example.gif" alt="drawing" width="45%"/>
<img src="/assets/images/blog_posts/ompl_constrained_planning/kuka_pos_con.gif" alt="drawing" width="45%"/>

> The project also improved the exiting code in many ways. More than 100 lines of unused code are removed, the logging statements are cleaned up and a surprising [bug](https://github.com/ros-planning/moveit/pull/2239) is fixed. See [here](https://gist.github.com/JeroenDM/426e3a7e083049295bbcb660c9a98e63) for a complete list of the pull requests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The project also improved the existing code in many ways. More than 100 lines of unused code have been removed, the logging statements cleaned up and a surprising [bug](https://github.com/ros-planning/moveit/pull/2239) fixed. See [here](https://gist.github.com/JeroenDM/426e3a7e083049295bbcb660c9a98e63) for a complete list of the pull requests.
```

## Limitations

> The main (temporary) drawback is that the code is still being review and merged. So it can only be used by building MoveIt from source right now. Hopefully, we can quickly work through the review process. Feel free to provide feedback and help out!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The main (temporary) drawback is that the code is still being reviewed and merged. So it can only be used by building MoveIt from source right now. Hopefully, we can quickly work through the review process. Feel free to provide feedback and help out!
```

> A second limitation at the moment is the performance. It can be quite slow compared to the other planning approaches and the solution paths requiring optimization sometimes. With some contributions from seasoned C++ programmers, we should be able to improve performance. This will enable us to make planners that optimize the solution, such as `RRTstar` and `PRMstar`, reasonably fast, and make the new planner even more useful.

Reviewer 2: "the other" is pretty vague.

Author: I changed it to "existing planners in MoveIt"

## Conclusion

I really enjoyed contributing to MoveIt and learned more about C++ debugging in these three months than during all my previous C++ projects. I would encourage anyone looking for an interesting problem to solve and a supportive community to consider contributing to MoveIt

> Thank you, Mark Moll (Picknik), Omid Heidari ( Idaho State University), and Felix von Drigalski (OMRON SINIC X) for mentoring me during the project. Also thank you to the MoveIt maintainers for generously spending time reviewing. For my project in particular thank you Michael Görner,  Robert Haschke, and Tyler Weaver.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thank you, Mark Moll (PickNik), Omid Heidari (Idaho State University), and Felix von Drigalski (OMRON SINIC X) for mentoring me during the project. Also thank you to the MoveIt maintainers for generously spending time reviewing. For my project in particular thank you Michael Görner,  Robert Haschke, and Tyler Weaver.
```
